Added Dpcumentation of cppyy Enhancements and how they relate to LibInterOp (#160)
compiler-research/CppInterOp: docs/UsingCppInterOp.rst

close to the compiler API as possible, and each routine should do just one thing.
that it was designed for.

How cppyy relates to CppInterOp and how it works
================================================

CppInterOp ties into several `enhancements in cppyy`_, following are a few:

1. **CppInterOp is a cppyy-inspired Library** that enables interoperability
   with C++ code, bringing the speed and efficiency of C++ to simpler, more
   interactive languages like Python.

2. **Reducing dependencies** of cppyy to minimize code bloat and make it
   faster.

3. **LLVM Integration**: CppInterOp's integration with LLVM's Clang-REPL
   component (that can then be used as a runtime compiler for CPPYY), will
   further enhance CPPYY's performance.

**CppInterOp is a cppyy-inspired Library**

A major use case for CppInterOp is the CPPYY service. CPPYY is an automatic
run-time bindings generator for Python and C++, and supports a wide range of
C++ features (e.g., template instantiation). It operates on demand and
generates only what is necessary. It requires a compiler (Cling or Clang-REPL).
that can be available during programme runtime.

**Reducing Dependencies**

> Recent work done on cppyy has been focused on removing unnecessary
> dependencies on domain-specific infrastructure (e.g., the ROOT
> framework). The idea was to convert the cppyy-backend to use Cling
> directly (instead of `ROOT meta`_), and then use it in cppyy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Recent work done on cppyy has been focused on removing unnecessary
dependencies on domain-specific infrastructure (e.g., the ROOT
framework). The idea was to make cppyy-backend independent
on ROOT by moving it to use the CppInterOp. The CppInterOp
library can be configured to use the newly developed Clang-Repl
backend available in LLVM upstream or the Cling legacy backend.
```

Only a small set of APIs are needed to connect to the interpreter (Cling),
since other APIs are already available in the standard compiler. This is what
led to the creation of CppInterOp (a library of helper functions), that helped
extract out things that were unnecessary for cppyy, etc.

The cppyy API surface is now incomparably smaller and simpler than what it used
to be.

**LLVM Integration**

Once CppInterOp is integrated with LLVM's Clang-REPL component (that can then
be used as a runtime compiler for CPPYY), it will further enhance CPPYY's
performance in the following ways:

- *Simpler codebase:* The removal of string parsing logic will lead to a
  simpler code base.

- *Built into the LLVM toolchain:* The CppInterOp interfaces will be part of
  the LLVM toolchain (as part of Clang-REPL).

> - *Better C++ Support:* C++ features such as Partial Template Specialisation
>   will be available through CppInterOp.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- *Better C++ Support:* Finer-grained control over template instantiation is
  available through CppInterOp.
```

close to the compiler API as possible, and each routine should do just one thing.
that it was designed for.

How cppyy relates to CppInterOp and how it works
================================================

CppInterOp ties into several `enhancements in cppyy`_, following are a few:

> 1. **CppInterOp is a cppyy-inspired Library** that enables interoperability

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure I agree with the factual statement here - but also, this is still not an "enhancement in cppyy". Perhaps the introduction to what is cppinterop should just be outside of this list?

Author: rephrased the whole section from an "**enhancement in cppyy**" stance to "**How cppyy leverages CppInterOp**". Now the section defines CppInterOp only in ways that is useful for cppyy

> 1. **CppInterOp is a cppyy-inspired Library** that enables interoperability

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **CppInterOp is a ClangRepl-inspired Library** that enables interoperability
```

   with C++ code, bringing the speed and efficiency of C++ to simpler, more
   interactive languages like Python.

2. **Reducing dependencies** of cppyy to minimize code bloat and make it
   faster.

3. **LLVM Integration**: CppInterOp's integration with LLVM's Clang-REPL
   component (that can then be used as a runtime compiler for CPPYY), will
   further enhance CPPYY's performance.

> **CppInterOp is a cppyy-inspired Library**

Reviewer 2: perhaps this can all come before where I commented above? Then CppInterOp is introduced and explained before we talk about cppyy?

Author: outdated: rephrased the whole section from an "**enhancement in cppyy**" stance to "**How cppyy leverages CppInterOp**".

close to the compiler API as possible, and each routine should do just one thing.
that it was designed for.

How cppyy leverages CppInterOp
===============================

> CppInterOp supports tools that utilize interactive C++ by using the compiler as

Reviewer 2: given the title, the focus here should be on cppyy. So, start with that and connect to CppInterOp instead of the other way around

Author: updated text:
cppyy is a run-time Python-C++ bindings generator for calling C++ from Python
and Python from C++. Interestingly, it uses C++ interactively by using the
compiler as a service. This is made possible by the CppInterOp library.
Following are some of the ways cppyy leverages CppInterOp for better
performance and usability.

a service, such as cppyy.

1. **CppInterOp enables interoperability with C++ code**: CppInterOp provides a
   minimalist and robust interface for language interoperability on the fly,
   which helps CPPYY generate dynamic Python-C++ bindings by using the a C++
   interpreter (e.g., Clang-REPL/ Cling) and LLVM.

> 2. **Reducing dependencies**: Reducing domain-specific dependencies of cppyy to

Reviewer 2: go ahead and be specific here - eg "Cling" and "ROOT"

Author: updated text:

Reducing domain-specific dependencies of cppyy
   (e.g., on the Cling interpreter and the ROOT framework) to enable more
   generalized usage.

-  `CPyCppyy <https://github.com/compiler-research/CPyCppyy>`_

..

   Note: These are forks of the `upstream cppyy`_ repos created by `wlav`_.

CppInterOp is a separate library that helps these packages communicate with C++
code.

-  `CppInterOp <https://github.com/compiler-research/CppInterOp/tree/main>`_

How cppyy components interact with each other
---------------------------------------------

cppyy is made up of the following packages: 

- A frontend: cppyy, 

- A backend: cppyy-backend, and 

- An extension: CPyCppyy.

Besides these, the ``CppInterOp`` library serves as an additional layer on top
of Cling/Clang-REPL that helps these packages in communicating with C++ code.

**1. cppyy-backend**

The `cppyy-backend`_ pacakge forms a layer over ``cppyy``, for example,
modifying some functionality to provide the functions required for
``CPyCppyy``. 

  `CPyCppyy`_ is a CPython extension module built on top of the same backend
  API as PyPy/_cppyy. It thus requires the installation of the cppyy-backend
  for use, which will pull in Cling. 

``cppyy-backend`` also adds some `utilities`_ to help with repackaging and
redistribution.

> For example, it initializes the interpreter (using the

Reviewer 2: given the paragraph break the meaning of "it" is totally unclear here.

Author: updated:
For example, ``cppyy-backend`` it initializes the interpreter...

close to the compiler API as possible, and each routine should do just one thing.
that it was designed for.

How cppyy leverages CppInterOp
===============================

cppyy is a run-time Python-C++ bindings generator for calling C++ from Python
and Python from C++. Interestingly, it uses C++ interactively by using the
compiler as a service. This is made possible by the CppInterOp library.
Following are some of the ways cppyy leverages CppInterOp for better
performance and usability.

1. **CppInterOp enables interoperability with C++ code**: CppInterOp provides a
   minimalist and robust interface for language interoperability on the fly,
   which helps CPPYY generate dynamic Python-C++ bindings by using a C++

>    interpreter (e.g., Clang-REPL/ Cling) and LLVM.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   interpreter (e.g., Clang-REPL/Cling) and LLVM.
```

2. **Reducing dependencies**: Reducing domain-specific dependencies of cppyy
   (e.g., on the Cling interpreter and the ROOT framework) to enable more
   generalized usage.

3. **LLVM Integration**: CppInterOp is designed to be used as a part of the
   LLVM toolchain (as part of Clang-REPL) that can then be used as a runtime
   compiler for CPPYY. This simplifies the codebase of CPPYY and enhances its
   performance.

 4. **Making C++ More Social**: CppInterOp and cppyy help data scientists that
    are working with legacy C++ code experiment with simpler, more interactive
    languages, while also interacting with larger communities.

**CppInterOp enables interoperability with C++ code**

cppyy is a major use case for CppInterOp. cppyy is an automatic run-time
bindings generator for Python and C++, and supports a wide range of C++

> features (e.g., template instantiation). It operates on demand and generates

Reviewer: ```suggestion
features including template instantiation. It operates on demand and generates
```

only what is necessary. It requires a compiler (Cling or Clang-REPL) that can
be available during program runtime.

**Reducing Dependencies**

Recent work done on cppyy has been focused on reducing dependencies on
domain-specific infrastructure (e.g., the ROOT framework). Using an independent
library such as CppInterOp helps accomplish that, while also reducing the code

> bloat in cppyy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
consistency in cppyy.
```

The CppInterOp library can be configured to use the newly developed Clang-Repl
backend available in LLVM upstream (or to use the Cling legacy backend, for
compatibility with High Energy Physics applications).

Only a small set of APIs are needed to connect to the interpreter (Clang-Repl/
Cling), since other APIs are already available in the standard compiler. This
is one of the reasons that led to the creation of CppInterOp (a library of
helper functions), that can help extract out things that are unnecessary for
for core cppyy functionality.

The cppyy API surface is now incomparably smaller and simpler than what it used
to be.

**LLVM Integration**

Once CppInterOp is integrated with LLVM's Clang-REPL component (that can then
be used as a runtime compiler for cppyy), it will further enhance cppyy's
performance in the following ways:

- *Simpler codebase:* The removal of string parsing logic will lead to a
  simpler code base.

> - *Built into the LLVM toolchain:* The CppInterOp interfaces will be part of
>   the LLVM toolchain (as part of Clang-REPL).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- *Built into the LLVM toolchain:* The CppInterOp depends only on
  the LLVM toolchain (as part of Clang-REPL).
```

- *Better C++ Support:* Finer-grained control over template instantiation is
  available through CppInterOp.

- *Fewer Lines of Code:* A lot of dependencies and workarounds will be
  removed, reducing the lines of code required to execute cppyy.

- *Well tested interoperability Layer:* The CppInterOp interfaces have full
  unit test coverage.

**Making C++ More Social**

cppyy is the first use case demonstrating how CppInterOp can enable C++ to be
more easily interoperable with other languages. This helps many data scientists
that are working with legacy C++ code and would like to use simpler, more
interactive languages.

The goal of these enhancements is to eventually land these interoperability

> tools (including CppInterOp) to greater communities like LLVM and Clang, to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tools (including CppInterOp) to broader communities like LLVM and Clang, to
```

enable C++ to interact with other languages besides Python.

Example: Template Instantiation
-------------------------------

The developmental cppyy version can run basic examples such as the one
here. Features such as standalone functions and basic classes are also
supported.

C++ code (Tmpl.h)

::

   template <typename T>
   struct Tmpl {
     T m_num;
     T add (T n) {
       return m_num + n;
   }
   };

Python Interpreter

::

   >>> import cppyy

>    >>> import cppyy.gbl as Cpp

Reviewer: Do we need this line? Did you test that example?

Author: Just checked, the example works without this line, removed

Background: I copied it as-is from the following ACAT22 Presentation (slide 9), which may have been built on top of the example in slide 3 (which does require this line of code) 

https://indico.cern.ch/event/1106990/contributions/4991292/attachments/2534654/4363310/ACAT22-BKundu.pdf

Further Enhancing the Dynamic/Automatic bindings in CPPYY
=========================================================

> CppInterOp ties into the following major enhancements in cppyy:

Reviewer 2: link to code/doc

Author: Linked to Paper "Efficient and Accurate Automatic Python Bindings with cppyy & Cling"

> -  **Reducing dependencies** of cppyy to minimize code bloat and make it

Reviewer 2: do me, these are three different things.

Author: added LLVM integration as point 3

   faster.

> -  A **cppyy-Style Library** (i.e., CppInterOp) that enables interoperability

Reviewer 2: doesn't fit with the topic of the list which is how cppyy is enhanced

Author: rephrased the topic to "How cppyy relates to CppInterOp and how it works"
(we're trying to fit a cppyy doc into an existing cppinterop doc, but this is the placement that was decided after several discussions)

   with C++ code, bringing the speed and efficiency of C++ to simpler, more
   interactive languages like Python.

**Reducing Dependencies**

> Recent work done on cppyy has been focused on removing unnecessary

Reviewer 2: be specific - the work is specially to move cppyy to CppLibInterop.  I'd suggest talking about it in the context of what dependencies are being removed

Author: I thought this covered it:

"dependencies on domain-specific infrastructure (e.g., the ROOT
framework). The idea was to convert the cppyy-backend to use Cling
directly (instead of ROOT meta)"

Can you please share other removed dependencies that I can add? (these are all I know from the info session)

Reviewer 2: I think my suggestion is to present things as being more positive - eg, we adopted CppLibInterop in cppyy, rather than negatively - eg, we removed root. It's just a matter of ordering. (eg, both need to be stated)

Author: rephrased

dependencies on domain-specific infrastructure (e.g., the ROOT
framework). The idea was to convert the cppyy-backend to use Cling

> directly (instead of ROOT meta), and then use it in cppyy.

Reviewer 2: link to root meta for the interested reader

Author: linked to https://github.com/root-project/root/tree/master/core/meta

> Only a small set of APIs are needed to connect to the interpreter, since

Reviewer 2: interpreter?

Author: I think this refers to Cling (mentioned now), was generalized earlier since I think other interpreters may also be supported?

other APIs are already available in the standard compiler. This is what
led to the creation of CppInterOp (a library of helper functions), that
helped extract out things that were unnecessary for cppyy, etc.

> The API surface is now incomparably smaller and simpler than what it

Reviewer 2: its confusing - which "api" surface?

Author: This was written as described in info session...
 I'm assuming that this refers to the cppyy API surface (which should be simpler after bloat removal)? Please confirm

used to be.

**cppyy-Style Library**

> The main use case for CppInterOp is the CPPYY service. CPPYY is an

Reviewer 2: not accurate.. no

Author: does "A major use case " sound better?

automatic run-time bindings generator for Python and C++, and supports a wide
range of C++ features (e.g., template instantiation). It operates on demand and
generates only what is necessary. It requires a compiler (Cling or Clang-REPL).
that can be available during programme runtime.

**LLVM Integration**

Once CppInterOp is integrated with LLVM's Clang-REPL component (that can then
be used as a runtime compiler for CPPYY), it will further enhance CPPYY's
performance in the following ways:

- *Simpler codebase:* The removal of string parsing logic will lead to a
  simpler code base.

> - *LLVM Integration:* The CppInterOp interfaces will be part of the LLVM

Reviewer 2: seems circular in logic

Author: rephrased:
- *Built into the LLVM toolchain:* The CppInterOp interfaces will be part of
  the LLVM toolchain (as part of Clang-REPL).

  toolchain (as part of Clang-REPL).

- *Better C++ Support:* C++ features such as Partial Template Specialisation

>   will be available through CppInterOp.

Reviewer 2: will be or are?

Author: I think this depends on when LLVM integration is complete, so this whole passage is written in the "will be" mode. Some of this work may already be incorporated upstream, but I'm unclear on the progress

- *Fewer Lines of Code:* A lot of dependencies and workarounds will be
  removed, reducing the lines of code required to execute CPPYY.

- *Well tested interoperability Layer:* The CppInterOp interfaces have full
  unit test coverage.

**Making C++ More Social**

> cppyy serves as a great proof of concept for other languages to become

Reviewer 2: maybe better phrased as cppyy is a first use case demonstrating how CppInterOp can enable C++ to be more easily interoperable with other languages

Author: suggested text incorporated

> interoperable with C++ (using LibInterOp). This helps a lot of data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
interoperable with C++ (using CppInterOp). This helps a lot of data
```

> scientists that are working with legacy C++ code and would like to

Reviewer 2: many instead of "a lot of"

Author: suggested text incorporated

> migrate to simpler, more interactive languages.

Reviewer 2: use instead of migrate to

Author: suggested text incorporated

> The goal of this research is to eventually land these interoperability

Reviewer 2: this seems out of place. what research?

Author: changed this research -> these enhancements

   struct Tmpl {
     T m_num;
     T add (T n) {
       return m_num + n;
   }
   };

Python Interpreter

::

   >>> import cppyy
   >>> import cppyy.gbl as Cpp
   >>> cppyy.include("Tmpl.h")
   >>> tmpl = Tmpl[int]()
   >>> tmpl.m_num = 4
   >>> print(tmpl.add(5))
   9
   >>> tmpl = Tmpl[float]()
   >>> tmpl.m_num = 3.0
   >>> print(tmpl.add(4.0))
   7.0

Where does the cppyy code reside?
---------------------------------

Following are the main components where cppyy logic (with Compiler Research
Organization’s customizations started by `sudo-panda`_) resides:

-  `cppyy <https://github.com/compiler-research/cppyy>`_
-  `cppyy-backend <https://github.com/compiler-research/cppyy-backend>`_
-  `CPyCppyy <https://github.com/compiler-research/CPyCppyy>`_

..

   Note: These are forks of the `upstream cppyy`_ repos created by `wlav`_.

CppInterOp is a separate library that helps these packages communicate with C++
code.

-  `CppInterOp <https://github.com/compiler-research/CppInterOp/tree/main>`_

How cppyy components interact with each other
---------------------------------------------

**cppyy-backend**

The ``cppyy-backend`` forms a layer over ``cppyy``, modifying some

> functionality to provide the functions required for ``CPyCppyy``. It also adds

Reviewer 2: cpycppyy should be defined

Reviewer 2: but otherwise, I find this sentence confusing. why specifically cpycppyy here?

Author: Added:

``CPyCppyy`` is a CPython extension module built on top of the same backend API
as PyPy/_cppyy. It thus requires the installation of the cppyy backend for use,
which will pull in Cling.

Author: CpyCppyy was mentioned as a package/extension within cppyy, that helps its functionality

some `utilities`_ to help with repackaging and redistribution.

For example, it initializes the interpreter (using the
``clingwrapper::ApplicationStarter`` function), adds the required
``include`` paths, and adds the headers required for cppyy to work. It
also adds some checks and combines two or more functions to help
CPyCppyy work.

These changes help ensure that any change in ``cppyy`` doesn’t directly
affect ``CPyCppyy``, and the API for ``CPyCppyy`` remains unchanged.

**CPyCppyy**

> ``CPyCppyy`` uses the functionality provided by ``cppyy-backend`` and

Reviewer 2: I guess I'm left asking why we need to introduce the details of cpycppyy at all..

Author: As discussed in cppyy orientation/documentation meeting:

**"cppyy is made up of the following packages: cppyy, cppyy-backend, and CPyCppyy."**

I have rephrases the section to clarify this, **please see if this is OK:**

cppyy is made up of the following packages: 
- A frontend: cppyy, 
- A backend: cppyy-backend, and 
- An extension: CPyCppyy.

provides Python objects for C++ entities. ``CPyCppyy`` uses separate
proxy classes for each type of object. It also includes helper classes,
for example, ``Converters.cxx`` helps convert Python type objects to C++
type objects, while ``Executors.cxx`` is used to execute a function and
convert its return value to a Python object, so that it can be used
inside Python.

**cppyy**

> cppyy provides the front-end for Python. It is `included`_ in code to import

Reviewer 2: pypi says "cppyy provides fully automatic, dynamic Python-C++ bindings" - but this text seems to be something else?

Author: As discussed in cppyy orientation/documentation meeting (verbatim). 

This section is about how the 3 packages:
- cppyy (frontend)
- CpyCppyy (extension), and 
- cppyy-backend (backend) 
work with each other. 
This paragraph is not a general definition of cppyy as a whole (as opposed to the front-end functionality)

I have rephrased this section a bit, **please let me know if it makes sense**
